

This a model from the article:  
**Sleep deprivation in a quantitative physiologically based model of the ascending arousal system.**   
Phillips AJ, Robinson PA. _J Theor Biol_ 2008 Dec 21;255(4):413-23
[18805427](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18805427) ,  
**Abstract:**   
A physiologically based quantitative model of the human ascending arousal
system is used to study sleep deprivation after being calibrated on a small
set of experimentally based criteria. The model includes the sleep-wake switch
of mutual inhibition between nuclei which use monoaminergic neuromodulators,
and the ventrolateral preoptic area. The system is driven by the circadian
rhythm and sleep homeostasis. We use a small number of experimentally derived
criteria to calibrate the model for sleep deprivation, then investigate model
predictions for other experiments, demonstrating the scope of application.
Calibration gives an improved parameter set, in which the form of the
homeostatic drive is better constrained, and its weighting relative to the
circadian drive is increased. Within the newly constrained parameter ranges,
the model predicts repayment of sleep debt consistent with experiment in both
quantity and distribution, asymptoting to a maximum repayment for very long
deprivations. Recovery is found to depend on circadian phase, and the model
predicts that it is most efficient to recover during normal sleeping phases of
the circadian cycle, in terms of the amount of recovery sleep required. The
form of the homeostatic drive suggests that periods of wake during recovery
from sleep deprivation are phases of relative recovery, in the sense that the
homeostatic drive continues to converge toward baseline levels. This
undermines the concept of sleep debt, and is in agreement with experimentally
restricted recovery protocols. Finally, we compare our model to the two-
process model, and demonstrate the power of physiologically based modeling by
correctly predicting sleep latency times following deprivation from
experimental data.

This model was taken from the [CellML
repository](http://www.cellml.org/models) and automatically converted to SBML.  
The original model was: [ **Phillips AJ, Robinson PA. (2008) - version=1.0**
](http://models.cellml.org/exposure/f63101a18254a2e75986ecf14bb8e2c6)  
The original CellML model was created by:  
**Catherine Lloyd**   
c.lloyd@auckland.ac.nz  
The University of Auckland  

This model originates from BioModels Database: A Database of Annotated
Published Models (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/). It is copyright (c)
2005-2011 The BioModels.net Team.  
To the extent possible under law, all copyright and related or neighbouring
rights to this encoded model have been dedicated to the public domain
worldwide. Please refer to [CC0 Public Domain
Dedication](http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/) for more
information.

In summary, you are entitled to use this encoded model in absolutely any
manner you deem suitable, verbatim, or with modification, alone or embedded it
in a larger context, redistribute it, commercially or not, in a restricted way
or not..  
  
To cite BioModels Database, please use: [Li C, Donizelli M, Rodriguez N,
Dharuri H, Endler L, Chelliah V, Li L, He E, Henry A, Stefan MI, Snoep JL,
Hucka M, Le Nov√®re N, Laibe C (2010) BioModels Database: An enhanced, curated
and annotated resource for published quantitative kinetic models. BMC Syst
Biol., 4:92.](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20587024)

